**Introduction
Hello and welcome to Chaos-Esque Anthology: a modification of Xonotic.
Chaos-Esque adds a wealth of additional features and options to the game world to allow you to synthesize
the combat environment you desire to fill with feats of extreme oppositional maneuvering.
These additions include: Buildable Buildings, Spells and Potions, Environmental Mutators, Mounted Guns, a
City Generation system, and the spawning of additional items such as weaponry and such things as spikes,
baloons, and other hazards. An inventory system is also included. Before we delve into all of that however,
there is one crucial tool that must be mastered: 


*The console

The first thing that must be known is how to bring up the text console for the entering of extended commands
To do so press ~ or Shift+Esc. To exit the console press Esc or press ~ again.


*Picking up items, Opening doors, Entering Vehicles

The second thing that must be known is to how to collect items.
In Chaos-Esque this is by way of the USE key: F.
Go near an item, and if you wish to acquire it into your inventory press F.

The USE key (F) also works to open some doors and enter vehicles (be walking at the vehicle while pressing F)


*Inventory

To list your inventory enter the console (~ or Shift+Esc) and execute the command:
          inventory

The   inventory   command will also list your stats, what spells you know, and your body temperature if the map has
an ambient temperature set.

You can use tab completion to allow it to type faster (type in inv and then press the TAB button on your keyboard (inv<tab>))
To search nearby chests use the   search   command in a similar fastion
To drop a weapon press Backspace. To drop a pack of the ammo that weapon uses press F+Backspace
You can also drop items using the   drop   command.

To list the inventory of the world, surrounding buildings, and other stats such as the ambient temperature execute the command:
          worldinventory



**Buildable Buildings
The buildable building system is one of the premier features of the Chaos-Esque Anthology modification of Xonotic.
It allows the player to build not only buildings, but also defensive structures such as turrets and point defense guns,
aswell as vehicles and barriers such as walls and obstructions. There are two building tools in Xonotic: Chaos-Esque Anthology.
There is the multitool; a building tool which creates medieval structures, and the utilitool;
a tool which creates futuristic structures. Hammers can assist in the building of a structure from a placed scaffold.


*Equipping the player with a building tool

In-order to build one must have the tools. In this case the tools are a multitool or a utilitool, and a blunt object such as
a hammer. To start players with a multitool or utilitool one may go to either:
Multiplayer > Create > Mutators   or   Multiplayer > Create > StartWeapons 

Multiplayer > Create > Mutators   is sometimes the more convenient of the two options as the multitool and utilitool start weapon
options are along the bottom of the screen.   Multiplayer > Create > StartWeapons   will allow you to select any of the weapons.

Next to the multitool and utilitool options in the Mutators menu there are a number of additional check boxes. These disable
costs associated with building such a resources, time, and research. A quick way into the game of design is to click the multitool
and the 3 boxes associated with it. Mousing over the checkboxes will give you information as-to what they do. In the
StartWeapons dialogue there are those options aswell as further options near the top right of the screen. Here you can enable
and disable various options such as what vehicles can be built, where one can build, and what Era the multitool works in.
The "MT Ancient" option toggles whether the multitool builds medieval defenses and vehicles or WWI style war engines.
Below the "MT Ancient" option are other useful options such as a setting that creates additional spawnpoints when you build
a bed or similar furnishings.

In addition to the multitool and/or utilitool, it is prudent to equip a hammer and a crowbar. There are many hammers in the game,
any one of them will be sufficent for changing to once a scaffold is placed and hammering it until the building appears. There
are two crowbars in the game: the Crowbar and the more archaic IronCrow. Their utility is to quickly destroy errant scaffolds
one might accidentally place.


*Multitool/Utilitool Basic Controls

Once one has a multitool or utilitool in hand, how does one use it?
The Left Mouse Button actuates the tool while the Right Mouse Button scrolls through the list of buildings, blocks, and
furnishings you can build. Pressing Shift+Right Mouse Button reverses the direction of the list scroll. You can hold down
the Right Mouse Button to accelerate the scrolling.


*Multitool/Utilitool Resources

Your multitool or utilitool needs resources to operate. These come in the form of ammunition you might find lying around the maps,
and of converted resources, which are converted from ammunition using the utilitool and multitool.

To convert nails into convertednails press: E+R 
To convert rockets into convertedrockets press: Shift+E+R
To convert cells into convertedcells press: F+R

Converted resources can also be gained by killing opponents: you will be rewarded with a portion of whatever ammunition they were
holding as converted resources. Think of converted resources as the "essence" of the ammo resource: it is not ammo, but it came from
it. Converted nails are akin to Iron. Converted Rockets are akin to Fire. Converted Cells are akin to Energy and Magic. They are
elemental in a way.

When a tree is cut down convertednail resources are gained. If a tree is blown up the acquired convertednail resources are
reduced by half.


*Multitool/Utilitool Misc Controls

F+Right Mouse Button changes the Z-Snap of whatever you build, Shift+F+Right Mouse Button scrolls the Z-Snap in the opposite
direction.


*Building with the Multitool/Utilitool - Part I

The first thing one must build is something that can hold land. For the multitool this is the garrison. For the utilitool this is
the command post. Gather some resources: take some nails, convert some by pressing E+R while holding the multitool. Once you have
a good ammount, but also have some free nails (press F to pick things up) scroll to the garrison or the command post and press the
Left Mouse Button to place a scaffold for it. Now change to a hammer (or set the multitool/utilitool back to melee) and hit the
scaffold with the hammer until the building appears. Your friends can get in on the action and hammer the scaffold with you to
build it faster.
NOTE: Try to protect your scaffolds: tanks can easily roll over them and destroy them in an instant.
NOTE: If you destroy your own scaffold you will be returned your convertednails but nothing more.

Once the garrison or commandpost is built you can then build other buildings around it. The garrison and command post, aswell as
the small castle can take and hold land, so they are the first buildings to be built.

One thing to note: one cannot build in enemy controlled land. As you build buildings the land that becomes yours expands. Buildings
can be captured, however, but garrisons, command posts, and castles will "lock down" the lesser buildings and must be captured
first before those under their auspices can be turned.


*Building with the Multitool/Utilitool - Part II

Some things to note when building: some buildings require certain knowlege inorder to be built. To gain this knowlege one must read
books on the required subjects. However it is possible to start players with the requisite subject-matter by enabling the knowlege
check-boxes at the bottom of the StartWeapons dialogue. You can also disable the requirement for knowlege via the
"Zero Knowlege" check-box at the top of the StartWeapons dialogue.

Some buildings require forge-parts for their vehicles or turret sub-parts. If you do not have these resources the building will still
be built, but without the vehicle or the turret. To obtain forgeparts build a forge of the proper type and enable it by pressing F
at its control point (this toggles it on and off). It will take converted resources from you or from your teammates inorder to
create the forgeparts.

Some buildings on the utilitool side require energy or oil to run and produce output (for the ammo tower, etc). Inorder to run these
you must build solar panels, energy tanks, oil tanks, oil pumps, etc. You can control their distribution using local energy tanks
and local oil tanks and oil control units. Additionally factories are more efficent if there is a furnace or two next to them.
NOTE: Solar panels will not produce energy if under an energy shield or if they cannot trace to the sky (or very far up into the
ambient ether). Additionally it often takes many tries in different areas before oil is found via oil well.


*Multitool/Utilitool Commands

For easier access to the selection of what is to be built there is the multitool command (also accessable via utilitool command).
To use this command, have the multitool equipped and open the console (~ or Shift+ESC) and type multitool
You can also use tab completion to speed up the process. multi<TAB> sele<TAB> 

Here is a list of the multitool / utilitool commands:
          multitool blocktype
          multitool placetype
          multitool buildingsnap
          multitool wallsnap
          multitool wallshift
          multitool vaultwings
          multitool lockz
          multitool lockz2me
          multitool lockz2building
          multitool lockzplus64 [optional multiplier]
          multitool lockzminus64 [optional multiplier]
          multitool setlockzmanually [number]
          multitool lockzprev
          multitool flipblock
          multitool select [block|wall|foundation|bridge|turret|building|floor|obstruction|none]
          multitool select block [filled|corrugated|shingles|curtain|castle|polish|hedge|graystone|sandstone|marble|wood1|wood2]
          multitool select wall [hedge|brick|palisade|roman|berm|curtain|castle|polish]
          multitool select floor [wood|tile|stone|granite|marble|romanmarble]
          multitool roofblockcolor [color or 0 to 17]
          multitool castleblockcolor [color or 0 to 7]
          multitool sandstoneblockcolor [color or 0 to 5]
          multitool marbleblockcolor [color or 0 to 22]
          multitool woodblockcolor [color or 0 to 17]
          multitool frlock
          multitool frlock2me
          multitool frlock2floor
          multitool doorcenter
          multitool furndrop
          multitool noturretsintowers

The most used of these are by far:
          multitool select
          multitool lockz
          multitool lockz2me
          multitool blocktype
          multitool placetype

"multitool select" helps you speed up the selection process.
For instance, "multitool select pointdefense" will select a mounted gun for building.

"multitool lockz" locks Z to whatever the Z (up down) of the last thing you built was.
(executing the command again disables lockz)

"multitool lockz2me" sets lockz to that of your player.

"multitool blocktype" sets the collision of the trace routines used to set down scaffolds;
toggle it to build buildings ontop of buildings.

"multitool placetype" toggles how the scaffolds are to be placed: straight down, or forward and then down.


*Control Points

Each building, block, etc that is built possesses its own control point. By standing on a control point of a
building for a period of time player can capture a building or fortify his existing buildings. Additionally 
if teammates or friends (the friends system can be enabled in   Multiplayer > Create > Advanced Settings  ) stand
on or near the control point it will capture or be fortified with increased haste.

Buildings which can take and hold land (such as garrisons, small castles, strongholds, commandposts, etc)
will protect the lesser buildings from being captured and thus must be captured first. (Note: if the control
point of the land-holding class of buildings is encased it will not lock down the surrounding lands)


*Recruitment Posts

Recruitment posts attract monsters to your cause. For them to attract monsters they must be built near or in
the correct building type. Different building types attract different monsters. To enable or disable a
recruitment post press   F   while standing at it. Monsters also require housing and food, thus a sufficent
amount of residential buildings (houses, apartments, barracks, etc) must be built. Beds also provide housing.
For food, fields or greenhouses must be built. (command example:   utilitool select farm   )

To view the amount of housing and food (grain, greens, grapes, etc) that exists execute the command     
          worldinventory
in the console.

The recruitment post for the multitool recruits medieval style soliders and fighters while the utilitool 
recruitment post recruits cybernetic soliders.

The following buildings, with a recruitment post, attract the following soliders:
          Multitool:
          Small Castle -- Royal Guard
          Barracks, Stronghold -- Knight
          Dojo -- Fighter
          Shrine -- Ninja Assassin
           
          Utilitool:
          Security Building, Glass Base -- Solider


*Marshalling

Once recruited, soliders may be marshalled. Marshalled troops will follow your lead and can be directed to attack
areas. The console commands associated with marshaling are:
          marshal
          marshalarea
          marshalfield
           
          marshalformation
          marshaldedication
           
          marshalattack
          marshalreattack
          marshalrenewattack
          
          marshaldefend
          
          marshallist
           
          unmarshal
           
          (NOTE: To open the console press ~ or Shift+Esc. To exit the console press Esc or press ~ again.)
           
The commands:   marshal   ,   marshalarea   ,   marshalfield    marshal troops from an increasingly wider radius.
The command:   unmarshal    can be used to disband ones army. The command:   marshallist    lists the troops at your
disposal. Executing   marshalattack   in the console will instruct your army to attack the area you are looking
at, while   marshaldefend   will recall them to your side. The command:   marshalformation   will set how tight
together you want your troops to be, while   marshaldedication   sets how dedicated they are to reaching their goal.


*Doors

Doors may be part of a buildable building or may be built separately (to jump to the door building section of the
multitool/utilitool selection enter, in the console, the following command:   multitool select block door   ).
Heavy doors often must be shot open with a gun or an arrow. Doors owned by the player can be locked and unlocked.
The following console commands are associated with doors:

          lock
          softlock
          hardlock
          unlock
           
          (NOTE: To open the console press ~ or Shift+Esc. To exit the console press Esc or press ~ again.)

To lock a door you own, approach it and enter the command   lock   . The door will softlock: it will open only for
you or your team or friends. If you enter the command   lock   again while facing the door it will hardlock. A hardlocked
door will not open for anyone, it must be unlocked or softlocked first. To unlock a door enter the command   unlock   .
The door will now open for anyone. To softlock a door enter the command   softlock   . To hardlock a door enter the
command   hardlock   .
   



**City Generation
Another feature Chaos-Esque Anthology boasts is a city generation system.
The city-generation system allows you to specify that a city or a city and a number of small towns is to be
created on the map. The buildings which are created are not simply boxes with an outward appearance but no depth;
they all have interiors which you can fully explore and, if you wish, which you can fortify using doors and other
objects from the multitool or utilitool. If you toggle   multitool blocktype   in the console you can even build
other buildings atop these generated cityscapes.
This system is accessable in the   Multiplayer > Create > Mutators   dialogue under the Misc Items heading.

*Enabling City Generation
To set the game to generate a city at start up do the following:
Open the    Multiplayer > Create > Mutators   dialoge
Select the   Misc Items   checkbox, a myriad of options will now light up ready to be set.
Scroll down to   AbdBldgs   ,set it to the number of buildings you want.
Scroll to   Concrete   ,set it to something low: 0 or 0.1
Scroll to   SC Tiles   ,set that to something high: 1

Now when you start the game, when the first player spawns a number of buildings will be created around the map.

But they are scattered...


*Specifying a City

In the   Multiplayer > Create > Mutators   dialoge under the    Misc Items > AbdBldgs    section, below the
SC Tiles   slider there is an option called   City   . To have a central city set this slider to 1.
Below the City slider an   X   and a   Y   slider have now become highlighted, use these to set the location
of your city. There is also a   %   slider which can be used to set the percentage of buildings that will be
located inside the city as opposed to being scattered outside (The default is 100 percent within the city)


*Configuring a City

Below the   X   and   Y   sliders is a   CMdw   slider; This allows you to specify if you want to allow foliage
to grow in your city. The slider to the right of the   CMdw   option allows you to specify how far away to keep
foliage away from the city.


*Multiplying Buildings

If you scroll further down in the   Misc Items > AbdBldgs   section you will come to an area labeled   Array
and below that is   Ring1   and   Ring2   . What these options do is specify the percent chance that rather than
just one building being built in a spot a 3x3 array will be built instead for a total of 9 buildings for the price
of one!   Ring1   extends this with another band of buildings (4x4) and   Ring2   even further (5x5). If you specify
Ring1   and/or   Ring2   but leave   Array   low or disabled it will omit the array but still create the rings of
buildings. Thus you can set    Misc Items > AbdBldgs   to a low amount but still generate many buildings. 


*Zoning

Scrolling down more you will come to the   Neiborhood Zoning   section. This section allows you to specify how often
one zone of SC Tiles buildings blends into another type of building. The types are varied from commercial, to industrial,
military, suburban, etc. The   KT   slider is the one most often used: slide to 1 to prevent much migling of building
types. The   IG   slider sets how often to ignore a particular building; this can help spice up a Neiborhood with small
ammounts (or large ammounts) of seemingly random additions. BL   sets the blend rate between different zones. SR   sets
the search radius for looking for what zone one is in, if this is set higher, zones will tend to be larger and have more
influence over the surroundings. The   UC Radius   slider sets how far the Upper Class - Middle Class suburban transition
band extends. This heavily influences the suburban look of your city. 

Below these options is 2 row array of small sliders. Each of these allows you to increase the amount of a particular 
building type in your city. Mouse over to see which slider affects which zoning setting. Using these sliders one can
create a military city or an especially commerce driven city.


*Different Buildings

Right below the   Multiplayer > Create > Mutators    Misc Items > AbdBldgs   section is a series of five options:
   Concrete
   Glass
   Built:Ancient
   Built:Aorist
   SC Tiles

Each of these sets the comparitive amount of that building type which will be generated by the city generator.
Concrete   builds abandoned concrete buildings, all the same.   Glass   builds abandoned glass buildings, all the same.
Built:Ancient   is somewhat more interesting: it builds Buildable Buildings of the type the multitool can create.
Built:Aorist   places futuristic buildings that the utlitool can create. Both of these can be captured.
SC Tiles   is the most interesting of all: it places on the map a multitude of different city, suburban, industrial, etc
buildings around the map. We explored some of the options associated with the SC Tiles above.
All buildings from any of these choices have interiors which you can fully explore and make use of in your fight.



**Friends
Chaos-Esque Anthology includes a friendship system that a server admin may enable. This allows players to create
alliances, and to break them, as they see fit. It also allows them to set policy for their buildable buildings
such as automated turret towers aswell as whom doors will open for.

*Enable Friends

To enable the friends system open the menu dialogue   Multiplayer > Create > Advanced Settings   , then scroll down
past   Teamplay Settings   to    Teams   ; there you will see a checkbox labled   Friends   ; press that checkbox
to enable the friends system.


*Make a Friend

To "friend" another player, approach a player, open the console, and enter the command   friend   . That player
will now be counted as your friend. It is advisable that the other player also "friend" you in the same manner.
Many mechanics check if the friendship is mutual before executing.
(Note: This mainly happens in non-team games. In teamgames only teammembers may be friends, by default.)


*Viewing List of Friends

To see whom you have "friended" open the console and enter the command   listfriends   .


*Removing a Friend

To remove a friend open the console and enter the command   removefriend x    with x being the number of the friend
on the   listfriends   list.


*Friend Commands

Commands associated with the friend system are:
          friends
          unfriend
          listfriends
          listexfriends
          restorefriend

Commands associated with the tolerated in the friend system are:
          tolerate
          untolerate
          listtolerated
          restoretolerated

          tolerateall
          tolerateloveall
          tolerateloveallabsolutely
          toleratenone
          tolerateabsolutelynone

Commands associated with the hated in the friend system are:
          hate
          unhate
          listhated
          listexhated
          restorehated

          (NOTE: To open the console press ~ or Shift+Esc. To exit the console press Esc or press ~ again.)


*Toleration and Hate
In addition to friends, one can have lists of those who are merely tolerated, or those who are hated.
By default, those who are tolerated will not be fired upon by a player's buildings, and will not be attacked by his monsters
unless they are attacked first. When a player is removed from the tolerated list (by the command   untolerate   or an alias)
they are placed in the exfriends list and can be restored via the   restoretolerated   command (restoretolerated x   where x
is the number they occupy on the exfriends list).

Those who are hated are always attacked by a players monsters and towers, even if they are "friends" too! To hate someone
eye them, even from a distance, and enter the command   hate   . To unhate someone enter the command   unhate x   where x is
the entry on the    listhated   list.

A global policy can be set by a player at will. The command   tolerateall   will see all non-categorized players as tolerated,
while   tolerateloveall   will see them as friends   and   tolerateloveallabsolutely   even lets them enter one's doors. There
is also   toleratenone   and   tolerateabsolutelynone   which begin to hate all comers. Your monsters and turret towers will
act accordingly.



**Jailing and Torture
Chaos-Esque Anthology includes a method for jailing opponents, (or teammates), if the map or the buildings you build have
prisons or duengons.


*Capturing a player

To capture a player first you must have the handcuffs or shackles. To capture a player approach them while holding the handcuffs
or the shackles and attack them with it via the Left Mouse Button (primary fire). If you are in range they will be captured.
To move them to one side or the other look at them and press the LeftMouseButton again, or Shift+LeftMouseButton. To release them,
look at them and press the RightMouseButton. When a player is captured they will lose their weapons and not beable to pick new
ones up.


*Jailing a player

To jail a player take a captured player to a jail and release them inside the jail cell. The maps krilldonjon, darkhold,
desertcastles, and opposingcastles all have jails that can be used. The buildable buildings: security building, gaol,
and small jail, contain jails.

A player can also be chained to a torture device, a post, or the wall if there are appropriate restraints. The following maps give
this option: krilldonjon, darkhold, opposingcastles. The following buildable buildings do aswell: Gaol. Players are placed by
releasing them (RightMouseButton while looking at them and holding the Shackles or Handcuffs) in the device area.

Jailed/Chained players will respawn where they were jailed or chained, again and again, untill they are freed (if ever).
To become free, the player must escape the jail, or be release outside of the jail.


*Extended Torments

When a player is chained to a wall or a torture device, he can be blinded or mangled.
To do so the tormentor must approach the subject with a bladed or spiked weapon in hand. Then the tormentor may enter
the console command   blind   or the console command    mangle    or   hobble . These injuries will be permanent for the current 
match, including if the player exits and rejoins. There are a few other commands possible, if the server admin allows it.


 
**Spawn Preferences
Chaos-Esque allows the player to decide if he wishes to spawn in his own buildings he has built, his mutual friends
buildings, or the normal maps spawns. This is accomplished by the   spawnprefs   command. By executing the   spawnprefs   
command in the console, one can toggle through the options. One can also enter a direct command to set one's spawn 
preferance. The list of commands are:

          spawnprefs
          spawnprefsany
          spawnprefsfriends
          spawnprefsfriendsonly
          spawnprefsmap
          spawnprefsmine
          spawnprefsnone
          spawnprefsnormal
          spawnprefsnormalonly

          (NOTE: To open the console press ~ or Shift+Esc. To exit the console press Esc or press ~ again.)



**Quest Spawns
Quest-spawns allow you to play a map in a single-player-esque way. When questspawns are enabled, if a map has a
questspawn area set in its .mapinfo file, then all other spawnpoints are disabled and new spawnpoints are generated
in that area. Otherwise a random area is selected and new spawns are created in that spot. Thus a starting-point for
the map is created. One notable map where this system is taliored to is DarkHold.


*Enable Quest Spawns

To enable questspawns open the menu dialogue   Multiplayer > Create > Advanced Settings   , then scroll down
past   Teamplay Settings   to    Teams   ; there you will see a checkbox labled   Quest Spawns   ; press that checkbox
to enable questspawns.




**Spells
Chaos-Esque Anthology includes a spell casting system which allows players to learn spells by reading spell-books and
to cast spells by reading scrolls or casting the spell from memory if a spell-book of that type has been read and 
the player posesss sufficent mana. Starting mana can be set in the   Multiplayer > Create > Advanced Settings   dialogue,
aswell as in the   Multiplayer > Create > Spells   dialogue. Mana can also be gained by drinking potions of mana and 
potions of rejuvenation.


*Selecting and Casting Spells

To iter forward through your spell list press   x   , to iter backwards press   z   , to cast the selected spell press   c   .
To see the status of your spells enter the console command:
          spellstats

To cast a spell you know enter the console command:
          cast spellname

To read a scroll enter the console command:
          read scroll spellname

To read a book in-order to learn a spell enter the console command:
          read book spellname

          (NOTE: You can also read a skill-book in the same way to learn an architectual skill
          for use in the buildable building system)


*Starting Spells

Using the   Multiplayer > Create > Spells   dialoge one can set what spells players will start with.
Starting mana can also be configured using this dialogue.


*Spell Descriptions

Agency                        You and I; I take your place, and you take mine.

AcerviLux                     From your hands a holy lance, a beam of light, to end unholy dance.

AquaCaelestis                 Water from the heavens.

BallLightining                Though not lightining-in-a-bottle... close.

Cancellation                  Counter a spell.

ChainLightining               Lightining at enemies in all directions (and perhaps some left for friends aswell!)

ChargedBolt                   Erratic electro-static discharge willed towards your enemy...

Clairvoyance                  What do you see in your minds eye? What can you see that I cannot?

CorvusPenna                   Raven feathers

DarkRitual                    This spell requires three participants: the caster, the transferee, and a sacrifice
                              all participants must be players or bots (monsters are not accepted). 
                              The transferee must stand in close proximity to the spell-caster. The sacrifice
                              must be infront of the spell-caster and in his aim, though at higher levels of
                              the spell the sacrificial target may be varying distances away from the spell-caster
                              and transferee. The sacrifice target must be either: chained, shackled, handcuffed,
                              in paralysis, or a prisoner. When the spell is cast the value of the sacrificial
                              target is evaluated. A good sacrifice brings rewards to both the spell-caster and
                              the transferee: first the mana held by the sacrifical target is given to the 
                              spell-caster and the transferee: 2/3 to the spell-caster and 1/3 to the transferee;
                              then a portion of the life force of the sacrificial target is converted into mana
                              and distributed to the spell-caster and transferee: 1/3 to the spell-caster,
                              2/3 to the transferee. A higher quality sacrificial subject rewards a greater
                              percentage transfer aswell as a higher conversion rate. Be wary: poor sacrifices
                              are offensive and can lead to injury to the spell-caster and transferee... or even
                              death for both.

Death                         Suddenly, the touch of death befalls he directly in the spell caster's sight.

DrainLife                     From your life-force; I do quench my thirst. But I do pray...
                              that I do not find myself drinking death...

CastFromLife                  My life-force is the well from which I draw, the strenth with which at you to gnaw.

Confer                        Mighty and powerful your life-force is, and weak surely is mine. But what if...
                              it were reversed? But I must be wary, there are those creatures seemingly living...
                              that are not...

Explosion                     Let us walk the path of explosions, together...

Extinguish                    This spell extinguishes all life and burning embers in a vicinity.

Fireball                      A fireball.

Firebeam                      A momentary beam of fire.

Firebolt                      A small bolt of fire.

Firewall                      A wall of flame; no two the same.

Flameburst                    Fireballs in all directions.

Frostbeam                     A momentary beam of frost the freezes that whom it contacts.

Grace                         A magic circle of sanctuary appears.

Heal                          Heal another.

HolyBolt                      Life to the living, and an end to the undead.

HolyLight                     An orb of light to brighten your path.

HolyWord                      Gives life to the living in the vicinity, and damages all the undead around the caster.

Iceball                       Frozen solid, and moving forward.

Icestar                       If beneath the immortal sky one does call, a star of ice to thee befall.

Inferno                       Into being, a burning beam that ignites what it touches, is called.

Lightining                    A beam of lightining is called forth.

LightiningBurst               BallLightining in every direction (though half as strong)

LightiningStrike              Lightining brought down from the heavens.

LightiningWall                A wall of lightining.

MagicBullets                  A barrage of projectiles is called forth.

MagicMissile                  A magic bolt appears and will track its target.

MagmaSphere                   A sphere of burning stone is willed to be.

ManaShield                    Damage is dealt, now only a portion to one's life, the rest to one's magical power instead.

Meteor                        A meteor called down from the sky.

MeteorShower                  A meteor down from the sky; if only it were only one!

Mimic                         Nice visage: mind if I take it?

MonsterToMonolith             A monster becomes huge.

MonsterToMouse                A monster becomes small.

Nivosus                       Snow

Paralyse                      No movement, but one can see and feel.

PhantasmalBarrier             Unseen, but acts, in ways, as a wall.

Plumosus                      Feathers of white

RaiseUndead                   Wherever a player has died, here is raised a zombie.

Repair                        Repair vehicles, buildings, turrets.

RingOfFire                    Around the spell caster is called a blaze; burning death as fires rage.

Rosa                          Rose petals

ScepterOfFlame                A column to the clouds, not of holy light; a type of tower in-which elementals delight.

StoneCurse                    Not all statues are carved, some are called.

StoneRain                     And they complain that a typhoon is damaging to buildings...

Timesink                      They slow, but you do not. Time... this time... is on your side.

VampyricConduit               A magic circle appears, damage done to those without, comes as life to those within.
   

*Spell Notes

Dark spells often are more powerful belowground, while holy spells often have more
power above-ground underneath the sky. The cost and recovery from a fire spell can
be reduced by wielding a   Staff Of Flame   , while the same can be said for pure magic spells
while wielding a   Magicians Staff   . A number of spells call forth from the sky: they are ineffectual
below ground where there is no view to the sky. Beware of drawing life from the undead: for it
is not life you draw.




**Grenades
Chaos-Esque Anthology's deployable munitions selection include:
Grenades    : standard concussion grenades
Fragnades   : grenades that disperse many deadly fragments
Flashbangs  : deployable asset that blinds enemies in a radius upon exploding
Smokenades  : asset which creates a smokescreen 
Landmines   : anti-personnel mine which can be buried if placed on a suitable surface.
AT Mines    : anti-vehicle mine with a large explosion radius, which can be buried aswell


*Grenade Commands

Grenades can be selected by pressing the button   v
   (or by entering the console command   grenadeselect   )
Grenades can be thrown by pressing the button   g
Mines can be buried by pressing the button    j
   (or by entering the console command   bury   )

Starting grenades can be set in the    Multiplayer > Create > StartWeapons   dialoge.



**Basic Tips

To spawn vehicles, mounted guns, turrets, monsters, and hazards randomly in the map go to
Multiplayer > Create > Mutators   and enable their respective options.

To start a game go to Multiplayer > Create , select a match type, a map, and press "Start Multiplayer!" or "Play"



*Vehicles & Mounted Guns
To enter a vehicle or a mounted gun hold F (The "use" key) or E while approaching the vehicle.
To exit  a vehicle or a mounted gun press F (The "use" key)

To turn the engine on and take off when in an aeroplane press  E + W

To load or reload a vehicle or mounted gun from its ammo reserves press R (The "reload" key)
To replenish the ammo reserves of a vehicle or mounted gun press E + R (The "reload" key)
(Note: fusion reactors will replenish the ammo reserves on a vehicle or mounted gun when in range)

To increase the gun elevation in a non-automated battle tank press Spacebar 
To decrease the gun elevation in a non-automated battle tank press Shift 

To increase the ROF of the rotary mounted guns press Spacebar 
To decrease the ROF of the rotary mounted guns press Shift 

In a vehicle, to increase the ROF of the rotary mounted guns press  E + Spacebar 
In a vehicle, to decrease the ROF of the rotary mounted guns press  E +  Shift 

In a vehicle, to increase the speed of the engine press  E + W  (if the vehicle supports throttling)
In a vehicle, to decrease the speed of the engine press  E +  S  (if the vehicle supports throttling)

To change to alternative (keyboard only) controls in an aeroplane vehicle enter the command:
          altaircontrols


*Weapons
To pickup a weapon or item press F (The "use" key)
To reload a weapon press R (The "reload" key)

To change to an extended magazine, if available
press F (The "use" key) + R (The "reload" key)

To attach a suppressor to the .45 Pistol, the Rifle, or the MachineGun (Mac-10) 
press F (The "use" key) + R (The "reload" key)

To attach a suppressor, if available, when possessing extended magazines
press Shift + F (The "use" key) + R (The "reload" key)

To turn on the flashlight press R (The "reload" key)
To change the color of the the flashlight press F (The "use" key) + R (The "reload" key)
To change the focus of the the flashlight press F (The "use" key) + Shift  + R (The "reload" key)


*Movement                                                                                Brawling
To move forward press W. To move backwards press S.          Punch:  W W     Uppercut:    Shift + W W
To strafe left press A. To strafe right press D.                     Kick:   W W       (While in air (Spacebar))

                                                    The default port for a server is 26000 (UDP)

**Notes

Archaic firearms (matchlocks, muskets) and munitions (charbelcher) are susceptible to enviromental factors.
They will fail to fire if immersed in water or subject to excessive deluge. Take care to keep them dry.
